# Scoring-Based Streaming Algorithms for Outlier Detection
Authors: Aidan Clark, Rithvik Nakirikanti, Jeremy Bui

Spring 2025

Originally created for the course Algorithmic Techniques for Taming Big Data, taught by Krzysztof Onak 

## Overview
This repository contains implementations of four popular streaming algorithms for outlier detection, along with testing code comparing their performances. In the outlier detection problem, given a dataset, we wish to flag “unusual” datapoints as outliers; that is, we want to flag points that seem to have been generated by a different process than the data generating process that generated the bulk of the dataset. This is particularly important in, for example, security applications, where an outlier could signify some kind of fraud or security breach that ought to be dealt with as soon as possible. In applications like these, we may be receiving datapoints x1,x2,...,xn one by one and, at their arrival time, we wish to make a decision about whether the point is an outlier or not. That is, we may be working within a streaming context.
	
 In a streaming context, outlier detection becomes more complicated. Our data stream may be so long that we do not wish to store the entire stream. But, how do we decide which datapoints to store and which to discard? Is there a particularly effective method for summarizing previously seen values, while still maintaining good performance? In this paper, we implement and examine four popular streaming algorithms for outlier detection and compare their performance. These algorithms include:

1. Incremental Local Outlier Factor (ILOF), proposed in [this paper](https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/4221341). Our implementation is in the file `IncrementalLOF.py`
2. Memory Efficient Incremental Local Outlier Factor (MILOF), proposed in [this paper](https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7530918). Our implementation is in the file `milof.py`
3. Density Summarizing Incremental Local Outlier Factor (DILOF), proposed in [this paper](https://doi.org/10.1145/3219819.3220022). Our implementation is in the file `dilof.py`.
4. Kernel Density Estimation with Reservoirs (KDEWR), proposed in [this paper](https://doi.org/10.3390/s20051261). Our implementation is in the file `kdwer.py`.

We include code testing these algorithms on simulated and real world datasets in the following files:
* `testing_network_traffic.py`
* `testing_credit_card_fraud.py`
* `simulatedTesting.ipynb`

A list of packages needed to work with our implementations is in `requirements.txt`. 
